JUDY WOODRUFF: But first:
Britain's Prime Minister Theresa
May has promised a national
investigation into the exterior
paneling, called cladding,
used in the construction
of high-rise buildings,
this in the wake of
the London apartment
fire two weeks ago that
left at least 80 dead.
Testing shows that the paneling
is highly flammable, and is
found on apartment blocks
around Britain.
It is thought to have
accelerated the fire.
The disaster at Grenfell
Tower has seriously
undermined confidence
in Prime Minister May's
Conservative
minority government.
Many believe the tragedy could
mark a turning point in how
Britain cares for its poorest.
From London, Malcolm
Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The faces
of Grenfell Tower haunt the
streets of North Kensington.
Hope that the missing will
ever be found has long expired.
Two weeks on, the official
death toll remains at 79.
This traumatized community is
convinced at least 100 perished,
if not more, in what was
a high-rise crematorium.
DAVID LAMMY, Parliament Member:
Grenfell is a monumental
disaster on a scale that we have
not seen for a generation.
It raises huge issues about how
Britain cares for people that
are poorer in our social housing
in particular who need
the state to house them.
It's absolutely clear that what
we have seen is gross negligence
or corporate manslaughter.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The
memorials proffer silent
protests and demand reform.
Lawmaker David Lammy, who
lost a friend in the fire,
is leading the charge.
DAVID LAMMY: At its heart,
Brits like to see themselves
as fair and as tolerant.
What they saw in Grenfell
has alarmed them.
They really saw the face
of a welfare state that
has largely disappeared.
I do believe Grenfell
is a turning point.
It's a Hurricane Katrina moment.
MALCOLM BRABANT: During urgent
safety spot checks in 120
public housing blocks across
Britain, cladding in
every single case failed
fire resistance tests.
In the London borough of
Camden, the risk to tenants was
compounded by other inadequate
fire protection measures and
considered so severe that the
council ordered the immediate
evacuation of 4,000
people over last weekend.
MAN: I think they're behaving
ridiculous, to be quite
honest with you, because they
have known for seven years
about all this stuff.
MAN: The system is broken,
it's cracking up, and it's
evident to see for everybody.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As
refugees from the wars
of former Yugoslavia,
Alen and Andrea Kevric
are used to leaving
home in a hurry.
The council gave them $7,500
for temporary accommodation
during repairs, but a private
rental agency rejected them.
ANDREA KEVRIC, Nurse: They
actually realized who we are,
that we are plebs from social
housing.
And they don't want us there.
This is the reality, how people
are treated in this country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: According to
local council officials, the
fire department recommended
evacuation, but hundreds of
residents refused to move.
The Kevrices, who have four
children, are uncertain about
their immediate future in
a country that has
become their home.
In common with many immigrants,
they have low-paid jobs and
are priced out of London's
expensive housing market.
ANDREA KEVRIC: To make some
kind of decent living, I have
to be in social housing, which
I'm very lucky to be
in, because it's so rare
and hard to come by.
I was lucky to get it.
And so my rent is considerably
reduced, but, even with
that, we just make ends meet.
ALEN KEVRIC, Premises Manager:
The divide between rich and
poor unfortunately only gets
exposed with the worst
kind of disasters.
History will teach us as well
that's the only way when we
can actually ask for change.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This crisis
coincides with a slew of
reports highlighting poverty in
Britain.
The U.N. children's agency,
UNICEF, says Britain has some of
the highest levels of hunger and
deprivation amongst the
world's richest nations.
It claims that one in
three British children
experience poverty in
terms of food, clothing
and social activities.
The housing charity shelter
warns a million families could
be made homeless by 2020.
Volunteers at this food bank
in the heart of London are
taking delivery of donations
that will help
sustain 50 people.
The food bank charity Trussell
Trust is reporting today that
four in five of its clients are
going hungry for days at a time.
DOROTHEA HACKMAN, Trussell
Trust: A big group of those are
not receiving their benefits,
benefit delayed.
The next biggest
group are low-income.
And these are people
who are just managing.
And one crisis, a canceled
day's work, an additional bill,
a sick child, any of those
issues can tip them
into desperately
needing more assistance.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Dr.
Youssef El-Gingihy, a
general practitioner and
author who has campaigned
against cuts in the National
Health Service, believes that
Britain's political tide is
turning irrevocably.
DR.
YOUSSEF EL-GINGIHY,
Activist: Austerity kills.
This terrible tragedy
with the Grenfell Tower
fire has unfortunately
become this grim monument,
this rather ghastly memorial for
the Conservative government's
austerity regime of massive cuts
to public spending,
particularly on public services.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The
argument about austerity
erupted in Parliament today.
Are there questions
for the prime minister.
Jeremy Corbyn?
JEREMY CORBYN, Leader,
Labor Party: This
disregard for working-class
communities, the terrible
consequences of deregulation
and cutting corners, I urge the
prime minister to come up with
the resources needed to
test and remove cladding,
retrofit sprinklers,
properly fund the fire
service and the police, so that
all our communities can truly
feel safe in their own homes.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: The cladding of
tower blocks didn't start
under this government.
It didn't start under the
previous coalition government.
The cladding of tower
blocks began under
the Blair government.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It's
been 10 years since Tony
Blair was prime minister.
Under Corbyn, Labor has
returned to its socialist
roots, and a rock star
welcome at last weekend's
Glastonbury music festival
showed his popularity
amongst young people.
JEREMY CORBYN: Is it right that
so many people in our country
have no home to live in, and
only a street to sleep on?
AUDIENCE: No!
JEREMY CORBYN: Is it right that
so many people live in such
poverty in a society surrounded
by such riches?
No, it obviously is not.
CLAIRE-LOUISE LEYLAND, Camden
Councillor: Did you like it?
MALCOLM BRABANT:
Conservatives like Camden
Councillor Claire-Louise
Leyland are fighting
Corbyn's portrayal of the
Conservatives as uncaring.
CLAIRE-LOUISE LEYLAND: It's
duplicitous and I think really
unhelpful for people who are
trying to deal with trauma
to try and turn this into
such a simple argument.
Difficult choices were made.
Things happened that shouldn't
have happened, and we need to
really explore what went wrong.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As the
politicians fight for the moral
high ground over Grenfell, there
is yet another report about
divided Britain by a commission
which says that successive
Labor and Conservative
governments have failed
to reduce the gap
between the haves and the
have-nots.
The Social Mobility Commission
warns that, unless there is
urgent radical and reform,
the divisions in Britain
will get widen even,
threatening social cohesion
and economic prosperity.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in London.